###########################################################################
#
#    INSTALLATION Instructions for the MMB-Interface Package
#    $Id: INSTALL.pod,v 1.12 2013/06/11 01:55:20 btmcinnes Exp $ 
###########################################################################

=head1 NAME

UMLS::Association Installation Guide 

=head1 TESTING PLATFORMS

UMLS::Association has been developed and tested on Linux primarily 
using Perl and MySQL.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 perl Makefile.PL

 make

 make test

 make install
 
 perl CUICollector.pl --directory metamapped-baseline/2014/

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The UMLS::Association module provides a framework for exploring the semantic association
of terms in the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS). 

=head1 REQUIREMENTS

UMLS-Interface REQUIRES that the following software packages and data:

=head2 Programming Languages

 Perl (version 5.8.0 or better)

=head2 CPAN Modules

 DBI
 DBD::mysql
 Text::NSP
 Compress::Zlib
 
 and of course,
 UMLS::Interface

=head2 Database

MySQL (version 5 or better)

=head2 Data

MetaMapped Medline Baseline available at L<http://ii.nlm.nih.gov/MMBaseline>

=head1 INSTALLATION STAGES

=over

=item The installation is broken into four stages:


=item Stage 1:  Install Programming Languages

	  If already installed you need at minimum: 
	      - Perl version 5.10 or better

=item Stage 2:  Install CPAN Modules

=item Stage 3:  Install MySQL

	  If already installed you need at minimum: 
	      - MySQL version 5 or better

=item Stage 4:  Build the bigram score database

=back

=head1 Stage 1: Install Programming Languages, if already installed go to Stage 2

=head2 Perl (version 5.8.5 or better)

Perl is freely available at L<http://www.perl.org>. It is very likely that 
you will already have Perl installed if you are using a Unix/Linux based 
system. 

=head1 Stage 2 - Install CPAN modules, if already installed go to Stage 3

=head2 DBI

CPAN modules, and will not be repeated in detail for each module.****

UMLS-Interface uses DBI to access the mysql database containing the 
UMLS. DBI is freely available at L<http://search.cpan.org/~timb/DBI/>

If you have supervisor access, or have configured MCPAN for local 
install, you can install via: 

 perl -MCPAN -e shell
 > install DBI

If not, you can, "manually" install by downloading the *.tar.gz file,  
unpacking, and executing the following commands. 

 perl Makefile.PL PREFIX=/home/programs LIB=/home/lib
 make
 make test
 make install

Note that the PREFIX and LIB settings are just examples to help you create 
a local install, if you do not have supervisor (su) access. 

You must include /home/MyPerlLib in your PERL5LIB environment 
variable to access this module when running.

=head2 DBD::mysql

UMLS::Association uses this module to connect, create, and add to the bigram score
database with the MySQL database management system. It is the MySQL sriver for the Perl5 Database interface. 

This package is freely available at L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBD-mysql/>

=head2 Text::NSP

UMLS-Association uses this package to obtain the frequency counts for 
propagation. This package is freely available at:

L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/Text-NSP/>

=head2 Compress::Zlib

This package is needed to read the compressed MMB output files into the bigram database.
These files are rather large so decompressing them on the fly saves a tremoundous amount of space.   

The package is freely available at:
L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/Compress-Zlib/>

=head2 UMLS::Interface

The core UMLS package provides a dictionary from content unqiue identifiers (CUI) to their meanings in the Unified Medical Language System. 
Refer to the UMLS::Interface documentation for how to install the UMLS database on your system.  

The package is freely available at:
L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/UMLS-Interface/>



=head1 Stage 3 - Install MySQL, if already installed go to Stage 4

Requires MySQL (version 5 or better)

MySQL is a freely available database at L<http://www.mysql.com/>. You may be 
able to install this with you package manager. Otherwise you will have to 
download the appropriate files from the MySQL website. Either way, make 
certain that the following are installed: 

	1. Server
	2. Client
	3. Shared libraries
	4. Headers and libraries

Sometimes the headers and libraries are not installed so you want to 
double check on that.

=head2 Installing on Fedora using yum

To install mysql using yum, type the following three commands on 
the command line:

    1. yum install mysql
    2. yum install mysql-server
    3. yum install mysql-devel 

After this is complete mysql should be installed. Next you need 
to start the mysql server by typing the following command:

     service mysqld start

=head2 Installing on Ubuntu using apt-get

Type the following commands as root or with sudo: 

 apt-get install mysql-common
 apt-get install mysql-client
 apt-get install mysql-server
 
 service mysqld start



=head2 Reminder

Also for all the installations, remember to set your root password:

     /usr/bin/mysqladmin -u root password 'new-password'


If you are not going to be using root as your main entry into 
mysql - which is probably a good idea - you can create a user 
account. Here is how I did it:

 mysql> CREATE USER bthomson IDENTIFIED BY 'psswrd';
 Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

 mysql> GRANT ALL ON *.* TO bthomson;
 Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

Directions are in the mysql documentation:

L<http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.1/en/adding-users.html>

=head1 BUILD BIGRAM DATABASE

Here we will process MetaMap Machine Output (MMO) formatted files into a database
containing bigram scores for Content Unique Identifies (CUIs). These files are
presumed to be compressed as GNU Zip archives (*.gz).

To process a directory containing only MMO files using default database settings:

    CUICollector.pl --directory metamapped-baseline/2015/

These same defaults:

    CUICollector.pl --database CUI_Bigrams --hostname localhost --port 3306 --username user --password pass --file_step 5 --directory metamapped-baseline/2015/ --verbose

To process a single file:

    CUICollector.pl --database filename_Bigrams --files filename.txt.gz 

For a full listing of options, 

    CUICollector.pl --help

Or consult the documentation for CUICollector:

    man CUICollector.pl
 

=head1 CONTACT US

 If you have any trouble installing and using MMB-Interface, please 
 contact us via the users mailing list : 

 umls-association@yahoogroups.com

 You can join this group by going to:

L<http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/umls-association/>

 You may also contact us directly if you prefer :

 Bridget T. McInnes: btmcinnes at vcu.edu
 Keith Herbert: herbertkb at vcu.edu




